---
aliases: 
highlightTheme: monokai
margin: "0"
width: "960"
height: "540"
transition: slide
defaultTemplate: "[[tpl-astate-base]]"
maxScale: "20.0"
center: "false"
css: ./css/local.css
---

<!-- slide template="[[tpl-astate-title]]" -->
::: title
# Introduction to Operating Systems
:::

---
::: title 
Definition and Purpose
:::
- **Operating System (OS):** Software that manages the computer's hardware resources.
- **Key Functions:**
    - Simplifies running programs.
    - Manages memory sharing.
    - Facilitates interaction with devices.
    - Ensures efficient and correct system operations.
- **Von Neumann Model:** Fetch, decode, execute
---
::: title 
Virtualization and the Role of OS
:::
- **Virtualization:**
	- **Concept:** The OS virtualizes physical resources (CPU, memory, disk) into more powerful, easy-to-use virtual resources.
	- **APIs**
- **Role of OS:**
	- Manages resources.
	- Ensures efficient resource sharing.
---
::: title
Virtualizing the CPU
:::
- **Running Multiple Programs Simultaneously:**
- **Virtualization:**
	- **Context Switching**
- **Interfaces (APIs):** starting, stopping, manage
- **OS Policies:** Decide which programs run at any given time, governed by policies.
- The OS acts as a resource manager, handling CPU time, memory, and other resources. Ensures **Efficient Allocation**.
- **Key Questions:**
	- How does the OS decide which program to run?
	- How does the OS ensure efficient use of resources?
---
::: title
Virtualizing Memory
:::
- **Memory as an Array:** Physical memory structured as a simple array of bytes.
- **Memory Access:** Programs constantly access memory.
- **Virtual Address Space:** The OS virtualizes memory, providing private address space.
- **Private Memory:** Each running program believes it has exclusive access to its memory.
- **OS Role:**
	- The OS maps each process's virtual address space to physical memory.
	- This ensures that memory references in one process do not interfere with others.
---
::: title
Example Program (Memory Allocation)
:::

```c
#include <unistd.h> 
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include "common.h"

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { 
	int *p = malloc(sizeof(int));
	assert(p != NULL);
	printf("(%d) address pointed to by p: %p\n", getpid(), p);
	*p = 0;
	while (1) { 
		Spin(1);
		*p = *p + 1;
		printf("(%d) p: %d\n", getpid(), *p);
	}
	
	return 0;
}
```
---
::: title
Example Program (Memory Allocation) cont'd
:::

```bash
prompt> ./mem 
(2134) address pointed to by p: 0x200000 
(2134) p: 1 
(2134) p: 2 
(2134) p: 3 
(2134) p: 4 
(2134) p: 5 
ˆC
```
---
::: title
Example Program (Memory Allocation) cont'd
:::

```bash
prompt> ./mem & ./mem & 
[1] 24113 
[2] 24114 
(24113) address pointed to by p: 0x200000 
(24114) address pointed to by p: 0x200000 
(24113) p: 1 
(24114) p: 1 
(24114) p: 2 
(24113) p: 2 
(24113) p: 3 
(24114) p: 3 
(24113) p: 4 
(24114) p: 4 
...
```
---
::: title
Introduction to Concurrency
:::

- **Concurrency** refers to the challenges that arise when multiple tasks are executed simultaneously within the same program.
- **Relevance:** 
	- Initially observed mainly within operating systems.
	- Concurrency issues are now prevalent in most modern problems.
- Understanding concurrency is essential for developing robust, reliable software in modern multi-threaded environments.
-  **Race Conditions:** Non-atomic steps can lead to race conditions.
---
::: title
Example Program (Multi-threaded Program)
:::

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include "common.h"
#include "common_threads.h"

volatile int counter = 0;
int loops;

void *worker(void *arg) { 
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < loops; i++) { counter++; } 
	return NULL;
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { 
	if (argc != 2) { 
		fprintf(stderr, "usage: threads <value>\n");
		exit(1);
	}
	loops = atoi(argv[1]);
	pthread_t p1, p2;
	printf("Initial value : %d\n", counter);
	
	Pthread_create(&p1, NULL, worker, NULL);
	Pthread_create(&p2, NULL, worker, NULL);
	Pthread_join(p1, NULL);
	Pthread_join(p2, NULL);
	
	printf("Final value : %d\n", counter);
	return 0;
}
```
---
::: title
Example Program (Multi-threaded Program) cont'd
:::
```bash
prompt> gcc -o threads threads.c -Wall -pthread 
prompt> ./threads 1000 
Initial value : 0 
Final value : 2000
```

---
::: title
Example Program (Multi-threaded Program) cont'd
:::
```bash
prompt> ./threads 100000 
Initial value : 0 
Final value : 143012 // huh?? 

prompt> ./threads 100000 
Initial value : 0 
Final value : 137298 // what the??
```

---
::: title
Introduction to Persistence
:::
- **Persistence** is the ability to store data in a way that survives system crashes or power losses.
- Volatile memory loses data when power is lost vs Persistent storage ensures data longevity.
- The **file system** manages data storage on these devices.
- Unlike CPU and memory, the OS does not provide a private virtualized disk for each application.
- **I/O Requests:** Involves complex I/O requests requiring deep knowledge of devices.
---
::: title
Key Goals in OS Design
:::
- **Abstraction:** Simplifies complex systems into manageable pieces, enabling high-level development.
- **Performance:** Balances resource demands to minimize overheads and ensure efficiency.
- **Protection:** Isolates applications to prevent interference and safeguards the OS from failures.
- **Reliability:** Ensures continuous operation; critical for system stability.
- **Additional Considerations**
	- **Energy Efficiency:** Important for sustainability.
	- **Security:** Protects against malicious attacks.
	- **Mobility:** Adapts design for portable devices.
	- **Adaptability:** Principles apply across different devices.
---
::: title
Evolution of Operating Systems
:::
- **Early Operating Systems: Just Libraries**
    - Early OSes were libraries of functions, providing APIs for low-level I/O handling.
	- **Batch Processing:** Mainframes ran one program at a time, managed by operators, with jobs executed in batches.
- **Evolution Beyond Libraries: Protection**
    - OS code needed special privileges for secure hardware management.
	- **System Calls:** Transition from user mode to kernel mode for critical tasks, ensuring secure operations.
- **The Era of Multiprogramming**
	- **Minicomputers:** Affordable, accessible computing (e.g., PDP series) led to multiprogramming, optimizing CPU usage.
    - Memory protection and correct handling of concurrency were essential for stability.

---
::: title
The Modern Era of Operating Systems
:::
- **UNIX Operating System**
    - Developed by Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie, UNIX’s modularity and simplicity influenced modern OS design.
- **PC Revolution**
	- **Early PCs:** DOS and early Mac OS lacked features like memory protection, leading to instability.
	- **Reintroduction of Advanced Features:**
	    - **macOS (formerly Mac OS X):** Built on UNIX, incorporating its robust features.
	    - **Windows NT:** Significant advancement in Microsoft’s OS, adopting advanced concepts.
- **Modern Mobile and Embedded Systems**
	- Today mobile devices are more similar to minicomputer systems reflecting the enduring value of foundational OS principles.